>> The views presented in
this documentary are solely
the personal opinions and views
of the creators and directors
of this film.
We assume no liability
for your actions
based on the content
of this video.
We do not promote the
use of any substances
and assume no responsibility
for actions taken.
Please do your own research
for legality in your area.
Always consult a physician
before ingesting any substance
or making any changes to
your current health regime.
>> The higher you go, the
smaller it all becomes as you
begin to see the essence
of others and of yourself,
to experience the
interconnectedness of all life.
As you contemplate your reality
through your eye, the window
of your perception, your world
gathers its elemental senses
to mirror your awareness.
The truth of creation
gazes back at you.
>> Most of us think that we
behave for reasons that we
understand, but most of our
behavior is actually governed
by unconscious forces.
Now, the psychedelic
plants can manifest
what's in the unconscious mind.
What you will bring out
of you will save you.
>> People's minds are opening,
and we are seeing this rapid
evolution in consciousness
that's accelerating
at an exponential rate.
>> So you're about to watch
a documentary about plant
medicines and psychedelics.
Just a few short years ago, my
entire perspective towards them
was shattered and
then reconstructed
in a whole new light.
And my intention
of making this film
is to share the other
side the story with you.
So where does the journey begin?
Life has its ups and downs,
and at a period in my life
where I felt totally
lost, unsure,
I started searching for answers.
And where does one
search for answers?
The Bible, spiritual
texts, family and friends,
elders, a psychiatrist
maybe, or, of course,
the trusted Google.
That's where I
usually like to go.
So one night I was
doing a YouTube.
I was watching something
like Alan Watts,
and in the comment
section, someone
referenced the name
Terence McKenna.
And it was as if that actual
comment was directed directly
at me.
I could have been the
only one who saw it.
And what it said
was, if you really
want to have your
mind blown, you
have to look up Terence McKenna.
So I quickly entered his
name into a Google search
and hit Enter.
And I didn't
realize at the time,
but that search alone right
there changed my entire life.
Within a couple hours, I had
ordered all of his books.
He spoke in such a way
that just sort of caught
my attention in a way that
had never been before.
So within the span
of a couple of weeks,
I had made up my mind.
I would be traveling
solo to South America
to partake in my first
ever ayahuasca experience.
Little did I know how profound
the experience would be.
When I went there, I was
envisioning addicts, maybe
some trippers, maybe
some punk metal
type enthusiasts, a lot
of hippie type people.
But when I got there, it
was quite the contrary.
There were doctors, lawyers,
professionals, artists,
authors, athletes.
It was a mix of everybody, and
I realized that everyone was
there for a different reason.
I was there because
I was a seeker.
Other people were
going through trauma,
and it was really interesting
to see that, wow, there's
so much depth to this one thing
that ties us all in common.
So now I needed answers.
I had so many
questions, and that's
what really spawned me
to make this documentary.
More than anything,
I really wanted
to know if we as human beings
were meant to have altered
states of consciousness.
So after I sat there with
all these incredible people,
meeting them for the first time,
with all these questions racing
through my mind, the main
one that stuck out was,
had we been psyched out?
Throughout this film, you'll
see just a few examples
of the relentless
propaganda attack
on psychedelics and
plant medicines that
has gone on for almost
a century now, which
is a continuing war that
has gone on for much,
much, much longer.
>> From the very beginnings
of unrecorded time,
men have reached for substances
in the world around them that
would alter, extend,
and materially change
their perception of reality.
The reasons-- loneliness and
fear, boredom, and a desire
for the new and the unknown.
Some have used these
drugs to journey
into the uncharted tunnels
of the mind in search
of medical and scientific truth.
Others look behind the
curtain just for kicks.
>> This emergence into
consciousness was triggered
by our ancestors' encounters
with visionary plants
and the beginning of shamanism.
If you analyze the
cave art-- there's
not time to go into
the details here,
but there are so
many details that
make it clear that this
was an art of altered
states of consciousness,
of visions,
and that plants like
the amanita muscaria
mushroom, or
psilocybin mushrooms,
appear to have been
directly connected
with this sudden
and radical change.
>> When we originally created
the historical timeline
for this documentary,
we realized it could be
a documentary in itself.
We condensed it to a
very simplified version.
It was difficult to
pinpoint the origin
of many of the psychedelics and
plant medicines in this movie.
In this timeline,
the farther back we
go into history, the more
guesswork and theorizing we
have to do.
Whereas we get
closer to modern day,
more evidence is
readily available.
Please keep in mind
that these dates
are based on what
is currently known,
and new discoveries can
potentially push these dates
back indefinitely.
Take, for example, the
iboga plant from Africa.
Traditions say it has been used
since the beginning of time
and actually represents the tree
of knowledge of good and evil.
I find this interesting, because
they are not the only ones who
have made this suggestion.
The Egyptians' representation
of the tree of life
was the acacia
tree, known to have
contained DMT, one of the most
powerful psychedelics known
to man.
And interestingly
enough, many scholars
believe that this
same bush, the acacia,
was also the burning bush
in the story of Moses
when he had visions of God that
came to him on the mountain.
In the Adam and Eve story,
could the forbidden fruit
have been the amanita
muscaria mushroom?
Terence McKenna was a
supporter of this theory.
The mushroom is the
fleshy, spore bearing,
fruiting body of a fungus.
Throughout the Bible, there are
many passages and references
that can easily be interpreted
as psychedelic in suggestion
simply by re-analyzing
a few simple words--
fruiting body of a
fungus, forbidden fruit.
Another theory that
Terence McKenna postulated
was that the food of the
gods, the psychedelic plants,
were actually what
caused man to evolve
into the current human
beings we are today.
Over a two million year period,
our brains doubled in size.
Current theory suggests that
we evolved through a change
our diet, which is primarily
due to meat consumption.
However, there are many
carnivorous animals
that have not
evolved, and there are
primates like the
chimpanzee that
do eat their fair
share of meat and have
yet to evolve, as well.
During that two
million year span,
various droughts and
changing climates
caused the forest to recede,
and many of the lower primates
ventured out of the jungles
onto the grassy plains in search
for food.
While searching for bugs
under cow dung patties,
they would find magic
mushrooms, the consumption
of which would lead
to cognitive advances
within these primates
and potentially lead
to an evolution into the current
Homo sapiens we are today.
This is what has been come to
known as stoned ape theory.
Where we start to see a
little more concrete evidence
is in the various cave paintings
found throughout the world.
Some dating back as
far as 40,000 years
have shown various references
to the possibilities
of psychedelic or antigen use.
Things such as you
metric waves coming
from the minds of the
various indigenous peoples
and even things as
clear as mushroom heads
were found painted on
the walls of these caves.
Around 15,000 BC,
we find evidence
of cannabis cultivation, which
throughout history after this
is pretty much found
throughout the world.
We also start to see
psychedelic mushroom cultivation
at this time.
Around 4,000 BC, evidence
of Siberian shamanism,
who used the amanita muscaria
mushroom in their rituals,
was discovered.
In 3,000 BC in Egypt, we see
references to the blue lotus
flower, a known psychedelic
plant, as well as
a plant called
mandrake, also known
for its psychedelic properties.
At the same time,
the first evidence
is found of the use of
ayahuasca in the Amazon,
as well as peyote and
other mind altering cacti
throughout the rest
of the Americas.
By this time,
cannabis cultivation
is in full swing in China used
as both fiber and medicine.
Just after 2000 BC, the
mysteries became wildly popular
in Greece, and after
four days of fasting,
a substance called
kykeon was ingested
that led to profound visions
and deep understandings of life
and death.
Around the same time,
roughly 1500 BC,
the Rigvedas are
written in India,
talking about a
plant god named soma.
A lot of the
knowledge around soma
had been lost
throughout history.
However, it is believed
to be a psychedelic drink
of some kind known for
increasing awareness, imparting
mystical experiences,
poetic inspiration, and even
immortality.
Some say that soma may have been
made from psychedelic mushrooms
and be the reason why the
cow is considered so holy,
as the mushrooms grow
directly out of the cow dung.
Around 1000 BC, stones
carved into mushrooms
are found all over the
Mesoamerican cultures,
including the Olmecs,
Incas, and Mayans.
The Aztecs called these
mushrooms [NON-ENGLISH],,
which literally means
flesh of the gods.
Around the 4th century AD
is where things get bad
for psychedelics.
Christianity became the legal
religion of the Roman state,
and all other beliefs
were condemned.
Over the next 1,000
years or so, we
witness the dark ages
and the Crusades,
where numerous people were
killed for not being Christian,
and most other tradition
tradition is destroyed.
This continued right
through the 1500s,
where European colonizers
destroyed the Aztec empire
and many other North
American indigenous
traditions and people.
It took a while for
psychedelics to resurface
simply due to the
stigma surrounding them.
Most people who used them were
considered warlocks, witches,
or crazy.
In 1938, LSD was
discovered, and by the 1950s
was being studied heavily
by many organizations,
including the CIA.
A huge turning
point was in 1957,
when "Life" magazine published
an article on psychedelics
and instantaneously
boosted their popularity.
The '60s ushered in a new age
of widespread psychedelic use
before the American
government shut them
down totally in the '70s and
declares the war on drugs.
All scientific studies
are put on a standstill.
In the last few decades,
it seems that psychedelics
are reemerging out
of the shadows,
and we are witnessing a
psychedelic renaissance.
Many people are starting to see
the true nature of these plant
medicines and have
been drawn towards them
for one reason or another.
Does it make sense
that something
that has been used
throughout history
be vilified and criminalized
as they have been today?
>> In the '60s, they really
were used in dysfunctional ways
and created a lot of suffering.
And that covered their
possible therapeutic use.
It's very much
like the sorcerer's
apprentice phenomenon.
You get something very powerful,
but whether it's beneficial
or whether it's harmful
depends on who's using it
and for what purpose.
So in the '60s, they were very
often used in negative ways
because it wasn't under
the guidance of experience
and wisdom.
>> Well, before I took
psychedelics ever,
we have to go pretty far back
into the '60s, because my
brother and I were really
children of the '60s.
And we were influenced
by the social movements
around especially LSD.
LSD was the catalytic
psychedelic of that era,
much as ayahuasca is now.
So we knew that these
things were there,
but very few people
had access to them.
After Wasson's articles
about the magic mushroom
cults in Mexico came out, that
actually predated the '60s.
His article in "Life"
magazine in 1957
is, I think, one of
the big events that
really brought psychedelics
into mass awareness.
"Life" magazine was
on the kitchen table
of every house of
America practically,
and everybody was pushing.
Everybody was
exploring about what
is this new phenomenon
of psychedelics.
And what does this really mean?
And they hadn't been
around long enough
for people to really get
a negative impression yet,
even though the
government and the media
was doing their best to kind
of show it in a negative light.
And eventually it
was, but at the time,
there was just a lot
of curiosity about it.
The whole idea of
consciousness expansion
was even kind of a new
cultural meme at that time,
and so they weren't really
stigmatized in the mid '60s.
They were catalysts for
change, and the institutions
like governments, and
educational institutions,
and religion don't like change.
The women's movement, the
environmental movement,
the anti-war movement--
all of these things
were directly influenced
by psychedelics.
At critical junctures
in human history,
psychedelics have
always been part of it,
and they continue
to be part of it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) Now, if you're
tired or a bit run down,
can't seem to get your
feet on the ground,
maybe you ought to try
a little bit of LSD.
Only if you want to shake your
head and rattle your brain.
Make you act just a bit insane.
Give your psychic
energy a feast.
Eat flowers and kiss babies.
LSD for you and me.
>> I don't think
they're for everybody.
I think what happened
in the '60s is
that too many people
started doing them
without any respect for
them, without any knowledge,
without any context.
And the society wasn't
ready for so many people.
The society was still
very adolescent.
>> What I saw was this massive
crackdown that not only
criminalized psychedelics,
but stopped all the scientific
research all over the world.
>> Do you want to join me here?
Won't you be seated, please,
ladies and gentlemen?
Come out here Ladies
and gentlemen,
I would like to
summarize for you
the meeting that I have just
had with bipartisan leaders.
America's public enemy number
one in the United States
is drug abuse.
>> What exactly are these
illegal substances called
psychedelics anyways?
A psychedelic
defined is something
that causes a
hallucinogenic effect
or causes an expansion
of consciousness.
Some of the psychedelics
you may be familiar
with are called LSD,
ayahuasca, psilocybin,
like magic mushrooms, DMT,
dimethyltryptamine, mescaline,
peyote, San Pedro cactus,
and the list goes on.
Even sometimes MDMA will be
put in the same category.
All of these and many
more that I've just listed
are classified as
Schedule I narcotics.
>> Sometimes in these troubled
days the very thoughtlessness
of youth has led to
a living nightmare.
Addiction to drugs,
too often acquired
with tragic
carelessness, may take
control of a life and force
actions not dreamed of before.
To these addicts,
life's only work
is to find money for drugs.
In their desperation,
no means is too foul.
>> The most restrictive drug
classification is a Schedule I
substance.
A Schedule I substance is
no recognized medical use,
potentially dangerous, highly
subject to abuse or addiction.
In other words, no
redeeming value at all.
>> A little bit of
health news for you.
A single dose of
psychedelic magic mushrooms
can make people
with severe anxiety
and depression feel
better for months.
Doctors with New York University
and Johns Hopkins University
performed independent tests
with the illegal ingredient
psilocybin.
They found it helped
cancer patients relax
and ease anxiety and depression
in 80% of the patients studied.
In some cases, the
effects lasted for months.
>> There's a great arbitrariness
in the definition of what
should be legal and what isn't.
So the example I often
give is that of opiate use
versus cigarette smoking.
Cigarette smoking
is far more harmful
in terms of its health
impact and its destruction
of human life.
In other words, give
me 100 people who smoke
and 100 people who use opiates.
As long as they don't overdose,
those 100 with the opiates
will be far healthier
30 years later than
if they smoked cigarettes,
and many more of them
will be alive.
So which is the more
harmful substance?
No question.
>> It's OK to go and get drunk,
because that gives you a little
break, and then next day,
despite your hangover,
you can get back to your job.
Or it's OK for big
pharma to prescribe
all kinds of consciousness
altering drugs
to deal with often invented
psychological issues,
such as depression or
hyperactivity disorder.
These accepted consciousness
altering substances,
like alcohol, like the
pharmaceutical drugs--
they actually, in a way,
underpin the alert problem
solved in the state
of consciousness,
but psychedelics don't.
Psychedelics lead to
questioning about everything--
about ourselves, about
our place in the world,
and about social structures.
And this is something
that the dominating powers
in our society don't
want to see happen.
>> So I was trying to find
out how many people were dying
of overdose on these
psychedelic substances,
and it was very hard to find.
The numbers were so low it's
hard to even find data on them.
In this chart here, you'll see
the amount of deaths caused
by different sorts
of substances,
and psychedelics were
not even big enough
to get a blip on the list.
It didn't even make
it on the radar.
One other thing that is a
really, really interesting
point to mention is that
more people die annually
from drug related
offenses that they're
incarcerated for and then
executed for than actually die
overdosing on things that
cannabis and psychedelics
in the first place.
The number of
studies that are now
out there that are
showing the benefits
for emotional, physical,
mental are growing in number
every single month, and
it's very, very promising
to see where the future
might go with this stuff.
So I was curious
to see what were
the effects, not only on the
user, but also on society.
And it just so happened that a
guy by the name with Professor
David J Nutt had already
done this exact study,
and he ranked all the narcotics
and substances on a scale of 0
to 100, and basically
100 being the worst,
and 0 being the best.
The one that scored the highest
was alcohol at a number of 72,
and things like LSD scored 7.
MDMA scored only a 9,
and psilocybin was a 6,
showing that the
relative, I guess,
dangers to people and the people
around them was relatively low.
Most people aren't aware,
but in 2001, Portugal
decriminalized all drugs.
Their drug induced
mortality rate
went from one of the highest to
one of the lowest in the world,
and in addition to that,
an amazing side effect
was that their overall crime
rate reduced significantly,
as well.
>> More and more people are
saying the war on drugs is
fundamentally wasteful, racist,
is focused on building prisons
instead of building schools.
And so I think there will be
a general switch in society
towards public health,
rather than criminal justice
approaches to the
problems of drug abuse,
because legalization
will not solve
all the problems of drug abuse.
It just solves the problems
of the criminalization
of prohibition,
just the same way
that the legalization of alcohol
and ending alcohol prohibition
hasn't solved all
alcohol problems.
>> [INAUDIBLE],, which is
another substance that is really
dramatically and powerfully
useful in the treatment
of opiate addiction-- in fact,
it's quite astonishing what it
can do.
But somebody did approach the
pharmaceutical companies, so I
heard, with [INAUDIBLE],,
and they not interested,
because why would they be
interested in a substance
that a person would
only use once or twice,
and their addiction is finished?
They'd much rather make
methadone or other substances
that you have to take daily
for the rest of your life.
>> In fact, we so
freaked out the DEA,
because they had no idea that
MDMA was used therapeutically--
only ecstasy was all
that they were aware of.
So when this group of
doctors from Harvard Medical
School and elsewhere
were on this petition
that I filed with DEA, we
took them totally by surprise.
And then when the hearings
started happening,
and we were getting
this major media
with all these religious
people talking,
they just didn't
know what to do.
And they panicked,
and so they put MDMA--
they criminalized it
in an emergency basis
while the hearings
were still going on.
And eventually we
won the hearing.
The DEA administrative
law judge said that MDMA
should stay legal for therapy.
It should be illegal
for recreational use,
but legal for therapy.
>> So there's definitely a
prohibition that has been going
on with hallucinogens, any
type of substance that alters
the mood or alters the mind.
And these prohibitions,
as much as they
may be looked at as the
government, or the man
enforcing rules upon us-- and
whether they may be arbitrary
or not, there is a lot of talk
about keeping hallucinogens out
of the hands of people,
making them illegal,
passing legislation
to make it very
difficult and punitive when you
get caught with hallucinogens.
A culture like that--
of course you're going to find
people saying that they don't
want us thinking, using the they
as whatever forces they may be.
That's what government
is all about.
It's about that gray
area and finding
the balance between
protecting the people,
and not cracking down too
hard, and imposing rule
on everything in life.
>> Now, I'm no science
major, but I found it quite
interesting that the
molecular structure of most
of the psychedelic compounds was
very similar to the endogenous
neurotransmitters, things
like serotonin, dopamine,
norepinephrine.
The other thing that's
quite interesting
is that DMT, the mother
of all psychedelics,
dimethyltryptamine, is
found within our own brains
in our pineal gland.
They say it's released
during dreams potentially,
at birth, and death, and even
in near-death experiences.
Now, the psychedelic experience
can be joyous and ecstatic,
and it can also be
scary and challenging,
but every experience
is different
for every single person.
And even every experience
that you have within yourself
can be different
every single time.
>> Do they make possible
creative achievement and a more
valid and intense perception?
Or do they merely substitute
an unreal fantasy world
for the sometimes
harsh facts of reality?
>> Oh, yes, I think that I
experience things much more
intensely now.
>> I felt this warm fire shoot
up the right side of my body.
And it just filled
me with this warmth,
and then I look off
in the distance,
and emerging out
of the darkness are
these purple and green beams
that look like Aurora borealis.
They look like northern
lights, and they
start waving towards me.
And so these beams of light
then wrap themselves around me,
and I look down, and
it's just like I'm
covered in northern lights,
which was pretty cool.
And the beams then roll
me over onto my left side
into the fetal position.
And I'm lying there,
feeling the most comforting,
deep, powerful,
maternal presence
that I've ever encountered.
And it was so nurturing and
comforting, and no discredit
to my own mother, but this
was the greatest mother in all
the universe, and I knew that.
And so I'm about to close
my eyes, and then, boom,
I hear this [CHANTING].
And it's the shaman,
or [NON-ENGLISH],,
singing what they
call [NON-ENGLISH]..
They claim that it's a
song that they channel
from higher powers, and it's not
really of their own creation.
And they use it to guide
those who drink the ayahuasca
through their experience.
And as he's singing it,
these orange and blue shapes
are emanating from his
mouth, and just expanding
across the room,
and just filling
my entire perceptual field
like this gigantic cloud.
At that point,
these three beings
float into the right side
of my perceptual field,
and I call them humanoids.
They were about two
and a half feet tall,
and all three of them
were just expressing love.
And it was all telepathic.
They were just imparting it
to me and filling me with it.
They start showing me all
these lessons about love
and just loving all
things, and, for example,
love being that it's
allowing all beings to make
their own choices.
As I started encountering more
and more of these spirits,
I recognized that
they were infinite.
And it was like peering into a
night sky, and you see stars,
and then you notice that there
are stars beyond the stars.
So it was like there were
spirits beyond the spirits,
and I was navigating this
realm in my consciousness
and beyond my
consciousness, too.
It was separate
from me, and it was
just like I was swimming
in a sea of spirits.
And every direction I
looked it was infinite.
>> So psychedelics are really
interesting because they take
you within and without in a
way that you don't normally
experience.
It's kind of a
mystery, actually,
because just from
the very basis that
anytime you take a
psychedelic you really
have no idea where
you're going to end up,
which is why it's so important
that, if you're going to do it,
that you do it in a
really good environment
and among people that have a
lot of love and respect for you.
And so where do you go?
I mean, you go into everything.
You go into yourself and into
the environment around you
more so than you
normally experience.
So it's really quite a
remarkable experience
from that perspective.
It's always going
to be different,
but it's always
going to be unique,
but, of course, the biggest
thing is really just
to be safe about it.
No matter what, the environment
is just as important as what
substance you end up taking.
And at the end of
the day, it really
is about a truly in-depth
exploration of the self.
>> Yeah, man, that's the
purpose of ayahuasca--
to go into the unconscious.
The person who gets scared
just means they have fear.
It's not that
ayahuasca caused fear.
It's that they already have fear
that ayahuasca is taking them
into.
So what they describe as a
bad trip is their inability
to integrate what
ayahuasca's showing them,
which is their
unconscious, which
was their fear, which
is their shadow.
So if they've come to ayahuasca
to feel and light love,
you're not ready
to take ayahuasca,
because that's not what life is.
Certainly that's a part of life.
There is light and love,
but that's not all there is.
There is also shadow, and
the shadow is our teacher.
So if you come to
ayahuasca, you have
to be absolutely committed
to learning from your shadow.
Otherwise, you are going to
have challenging experiences.
That's the purpose of ayahuasca.
That's the way the indigenous
people have used ayahuasca.
It's a tool to become
more conscious.
So that fear comes up.
Now you're conscious
of the fear.
That's not a bad thing.
That's a great
thing, but you have
to be ready to work with
it and integrate it.
>> I was actually in
Boracay in the Philippines,
and a girl from Brooklyn,
who was a shaman, knew--
we were friends, and
she knew my problems.
She actually tried
to work on me before.
And she saw on
Facebook I was there,
and she was going to
a retreat in Cebu.
And she stopped in at
me, and she said, hey,
there's this guy that I
knew who was just like you.
As a matter of fact,
he was even worse.
And I found that
hard to believe,
but she said he was even worse.
And he went to do
this plant medicine,
and did the plant medicine one
time, and he changed his life.
And I thought, you know what?
I tried everything else.
I'm scared shit of
doing plant medicine.
I'm scared to death of some
kind of crazy trip or something
like this.
I said, I'm scared to
do it, but I'm done.
It's my last chance.
The way this medicine works
is a little bit different.
He gives you the medicine, and
then gives you a blindfold,
and he taps you on
the tip of the head,
and tells you when
you can-- says
tell me when you see my finger.
And I'm about to say, well,
I can't see your finger,
because I have this blind--
I see your finger.
All of a sudden, I
saw the dude's finger.
And I'm like, I
have a blindfold on.
I know I have a blindfold on.
I'm not in Kansas anymore.
I didn't even really
believe in god.
I was in church
every day in my life,
but I didn't really
believe in god.
God for me was a side bet
in case shit went wrong.
If it was, I genuflected
here and there,
and said some prayers
just in case it was real.
I had no feeling towards it.
So all of a sudden, I'm looking,
and I see this guy's hand.
And he says, look
at the ceiling.
I look at the ceiling.
He goes, look.
And I see the ceiling.
Look through the ceiling.
And I looked
through the ceiling.
And he said, do you see stars?
I said, yeah.
He said, jump to a star.
And I jumped to a
star, and I was flying.
And I'm like, what the
hell is going on here?
He said, look to your left.
Do you see the moon?
And I looked to my left.
I see the moon.
He said, go to it.
So I went to the moon,
and I couldn't slow down.
And I dove into the
moon, and my feet
were sticking out of the moon.
And that's the truth.
The whole time you're
talking to the shaman,
telling him what's going on,
and he's telling you what to do.
So you have these things on.
This experience
has happened to you
I guess like virtual reality.
This is happening to
you, yet I'm hearing him
and communicating with him.
So I'm in both places.
So I said, what's my
first-- because you give him
10 questions, and
he writes him down.
I said, why am I so effed up?
That was my first question.
All of a sudden, my soul turns
into the three year old me.
He's holding my hand.
I'm walking a baby into
a house, and as soon
as I get around the
house, I can smell food.
It smells like turkey.
There's Bing Crosby
music playing.
There's snow outside.
It's around Christmas.
There's a Christmas tree.
I smell pine needles and shit.
And I get the immediate
feeling that shit's not right.
And so I go with the kid, and
I see a stain that I made.
I would never remember
making a stain at two years,
but when I saw it with my kid,
with my me, I go, holy shit.
I did that.
I remember doing that and
making this stain on the wall.
It was a cranberry
juice stain on the wall.
And so we walk in to
the thing, and we're
going to this coat closet, and
he's telling me where to go,
like pointing.
And as soon as I
see the coat closet,
I know things are going to get
probably worse at this point.
I open the coat closet,
and my grandfather
has his penis all over me as
a kid, the three year old boy.
And so I'm like, oh, well to me
that explains a lot of things.
I'm like, well, that's
why I'm so crazy.
That's why I can't
connect with women.
connect with dudes.
I can't really connect.
It's weird.
I was so shut down.
So it was the best
night of my life.
So the things I saw--
I found out what
was wrong with me,
and I was just in such
awe the whole time.
So it was a crazy, crazy
thing, and then the next day I
no longer wanted--
I quit smoking cigarettes.
I could drink.
I was drinking 10 drinks a day.
I could drink two drinks
and not drink another drink.
I wanted to start eating better.
I wanted to do these
things, and not
that I was trying to do them.
I just wanted to do them.
Something in me changed.
>> The human brain, after
all, is made for thinking,
not fumigating.
It's hardly a tinker toy for
experimenting with drugs.
This has been a
public service message
of the American
Medical Association
and your local station.
>> It's extremely hard to
speak about the experiences
of psychedelics or plant
medicines to somebody who has
no experience.
The best way to describe
an ayahuasca experience
or a mushroom experience
is to take the tea
or to take the mushroom, because
so much of the experience
is inexpressible,
is ineffable, which
is why we spend so
much time coming up
with language for these things.
>> Although it's very difficult
to describe what a psychedelic
vision looks like, there have
been artists who have been able
to recreate somewhat accurate
depictions of these visions.
I also found it
quite interesting
when I heard about a guy by
the name of Shawn Thornton.
Shawn was an artist who
had pineal gland cancer.
That's the gland response
for the production
of DMT within our brains.
>> Now, these mental effects
to the confirmed LSD user,
to the evangelist, if you
will, are felt to be religious,
and beautiful, and godlike,
perhaps because they expect
them to be.
Realistically speaking, they
are nothing more nor less
than a period of insanity.
>> So where does spirituality
come into all this?
Can you have a
spiritual experience
through a psychedelic?
The question was of
such great curiosity
that Harvard actually conducted
two experiments, one of them
called the Good
Friday experiment.
The other was done by
someone named Walter Pahnke.
They concluded
that, yes, you could
have a spiritual
experience through the use
of psychedelics.
And not only that, it also
lasted a very long time
after the experiment
had taken place.
>> I read a book
by Robert Muller,
and he was the Assistant
Secretary General of the United
Nations.
And the book was
called "New Genesis--
Shaping a Global Spirituality."
And so it was a brilliant
book, and I wrote him a letter.
And I said, I really
was moved by your book,
but you don't have a
word about psychedelics.
And so I wrote to Robert Muller,
and I told him about the Good
Friday experiment.
And I said, right now MDMA
is a psychedelic drug.
I'd learned about it in '82.
In '84, it was still legal.
And I said, it's still legal.
And would you be willing
to help open the door
to psychedelic research?
A college undergraduate
gets his letter
from the Assistant Secretary
General of the United Nations.
And he said, you
understood me perfectly,
and I do think that
psychedelics could be helpful.
And I will help you
to try to bring back
psychedelic research,
and here's a bunch
of people who are in
the spiritual traditions
that I'd be interested to
know what they have to say.
And so I kind of read between
the lines, and I heard him say,
mail them MDMA.
So this was Brother
David Steindl-Rast,
who's a Roman Catholic monk--
Vanja Palmers, who
is head of the zen
community in Switzerland--
Wayne Teasdale,
a Catholic monk--
Rabbi Zalman Schachter,
who was an orthodox rabbi.
So MDMA was legal, so
I mailed them MDMA.
And one of them--
Brother David Steindl-Rast--
took it in the monastery.
Other people took it in
their religious practices,
and then they wrote
back to Robert Muller
that, yeah, MDMA
really can be helpful.
So that kind of confirmed for me
this theory of social change--
that if people can
have experiences
of spirituality and mysticism,
whether by psychedelics
or not--
other means are fine, too--
that is a strategy
towards peace.
And that reaffirmed
my commitment
to bringing psychedelics back
and trying to mainstream them
into Western culture.
>> People are not finding
meaningful experience within
our culture--
meaningful spiritual
experience within our culture.
People have a longing for that.
>> There are many people
from traditional faiths,
whether they be, let's say,
of the monotheistic variety,
the Abrahamic traditions of
Judaism, Christianity, Islam,
who have participated in
ayahuasca ceremonies and have
found that it has
deepened their faith,
because it has given them a
direct personal experience
of who knows what-- the Virgin
Mary, Jesus, different saints,
or just a feeling of being
embraced by the Holy Spirit.
In fact, some people
have said that
all major religious
traditions have at their root
a psychedelic beginning.
>> God created the brain in such
a way to be able to communicate
with us, and this goes a long
way in explaining why there is,
for example, DMT in the brain--
that it helps
mediate the visions
which God uses to communicate
certain information to us.
And that information can be
evolutionarily useful or not.
It might be psychologically
useful or not.
>> One of the things that they
have been used for thousands
of years is to help people
have spiritual experiences.
And the essence of the spiritual
experience is a sense of unity,
a sense that we're
all connected,
a sense that there
is one larger system.
We're on the planet
in the universe.
And then if you can
feel that, then people
that are different from you are
actually more similar to you
than different.
We're all part of
the human family,
and if you can identify as part
of the human family instead
of my country, my religion,
my race, my gender,
my sexual orientation,
all these different ways
that we subdivide ourselves--
that if people could
have a deeper connection
to life itself, to the
planet, to everybody,
that then that would be
the ground at which peace
could be made.
The UNESCO charter
says that, since wars
begin in the minds of men,
it's in the minds of men
that the defenses of
peace must be constructed.
>> So this DMT that's
inside of our brains,
this natural psychedelic--
I was really curious.
How do we access it?
So I went on a quest.
I started exploring
different methods.
I tried meditating.
I did crazy
breathing techniques.
I went to go train with Wim
Hof and learn his breathing
techniques.
And we jumped in frozen lakes,
and I went out into the cold.
I also participated
in Inipi ceremonies,
Native American sweat lodges.
At one point, I went
on a fast for 55 days.
I lost over 40 pounds, and at
some points during that fast, I
would not eat or drink water.
So I dry fasted for up
to 100 hours straight.
And on this quest, I reached
many different altered states
of consciousness,
nowhere near where
I had reached with ayahuasca
or any of the psychedelics,
but there was something there,
but it just wasn't exactly
the same.
>> Here's how I would explain
the difference between taking
a plant medicine or any medicine
in order to open yourself up,
and doing it through
breathing and movement.
By the way, shamans have
been using breathing,
and movement, and
dance, [CHANTING],,
drumming, bum, bum, bum,
bum, bum, bum, bum, bum, bum,
rattles.
They've been using sound
and movement in order
to alter their states
of consciousness
so that they could receive
information about how to heal
others from the very beginning.
And that's not to say that plant
medicines weren't a part of it,
but that is to say that they
also understood and took
great care to get into the
intelligence of the body
by opening it up with
vibration, movement,
and breathing in
order to expand--
you know when you take
the medicine and, boom,
you're waking up the things?
Well, shamans have
been doing that
for generations with
just movement, breathing,
and vibration-- sound.
So I was able to
experience that first.
I was able to experience
opening up through movement,
breathing, sound in the
same way that a shaman
would in that way.
And I had my experience.
I had my evolution.
I had all the gifts that
were available to me,
many of which sound a lot like
what people who have used plant
medicine experience
and describe,
which are the visions, which are
the downloads of insight, which
are the dreams that show up
days and weeks afterwards.
All of a sudden it's almost like
there is a-- it's interesting
that I go here.
There is an opening--
a third eye opening,
and you start seeing things
that you couldn't see before.
The insights are there.
By using bioenergetics,
active breathing,
active meditation over the
course of three years--
it had been a process for me,
where slowly I'm opening up
to states of consciousness.
Slowly I'm tippy toeing
into different dimensions.
Slowly I'm receiving the
right information for me
at the right time
for my evolution
over the course of years.
It's a process.
At this point, I could change
my state of consciousness
now with just a little bit
of drumming, a little bit
of yelling and acting out.
And then I could work myself
into that type of state.
When I experienced
the plant medicine,
and when I speak to
people who use it,
it's like going from walking
around to waking up instantly,
as opposed to walking around and
slowly waking up to yourself.
One way I like to describe
the difference between the two
is active meditation
and bioenergetics
is like if you can imagine
you're in a block of ice.
We're all frozen in
our block of ice.
Active breathing is
like the sun slowly
melting, and know you're
starting to move a little bit.
You got a little
bit more motility.
And as you begin, the ice
melts, and you begin to open up,
and then you become alive.
The plant medicine
is like you're
in that same block of ice, and
someone takes a sledgehammer
and goes, bang!
And cracks you wide open.
That's why a lot of people
end up going a little crazy--
because they're not
prepared for it.
I would say, if you're
going to use plant medicine,
begin with months
of meditation first.
That way you're familiar
with the emotions
that are going to arise.
A lot of people, when they
take that plant medicine,
there's fear.
There's uncontrollable sobbing.
There's all this
emotional reaction
that they don't know
where it's coming from,
but it's been trapped
in their body.
They're just open to it now,
and it can be very scary.
But if you use
active meditation,
you get in touch with your body
in the way I'm describing now
over the course of
a few months first,
you will begin to open
up slowly and process
a lot of the junk that's
laying on the surface
first, so that when you do
take the plant medicine,
there will be a greater
opportunity for a more
enlightening experience.
>> So when I started
doing breath work,
I started to notice that we
could access certain states
of mind and certain states of
consciousness that normally
wouldn't be able to be achieved
by just a natural practice,
and that I could achieve
them pretty easily and pretty
effectively.
What I find really
interesting about this
is that I've been teaching
this stuff all over the world,
and I've been meeting
so many people
from so many
different practices.
And a lot of times they tell
me, when I do the breath
work with them--
and it's important.
You can't just hyperventilate
and dive into this stuff.
It's very important to do
this in a proper setting
in a safe way with
proper guidance,
but whenever I do
this with people
and they get into this
state, a lot of times
afterwards they say
things to me like I've
been on an ayahuasca journey.
And I've had a very
similar experience.
Or somebody says I've
had an LSD experience,
and this was a
very similar thing.
Or they said I have been in
a sensory deprivation tank
for so many hours, and I
had a similar experience.
A lot of times we
refer to this kind
of breathing as DMT
reading, and this simply
has to do with the shared
experiences with people
of which they know
that they've had
DMT in their system-- so
with ayahuasca or even
smoking actual DMT.
And people would describe
these experiences,
and these would be
extremely similar--
so the kind of
things that people
see, the kind of
revelations that they have,
the kind of connection
they feel to the universe
or whatever you
want to call it--
but also the kind of
change that they would feel
in their daily life afterwards.
So during those very
deep breathing sessions,
people a longtime
afterwards would say it's
changed me in a profound way in
a very similar way as to what
people say when they use DMT.
>> Meditation, drumming,
ecstatic dance,
sensory deprivation tanks,
sound healing therapies--
all have been known or reported
to create altered states
of consciousness similar to a
DMT or psychedelic experience.
So what did I find
out after trying
all these different
modalities, trying
to access altered
states of consciousness.
I got to some pretty
interesting places,
but nowhere close to where
I had been on psychedelics.
Maybe I need to try
them a little bit longer
or dedicate myself
a little bit more.
Sometimes some of
these practices
might take 10, 20, or
30 years to achieve
those states of what
they might describe
as enlightenment or nirvana.
But one thing is
for certain-- is
that it seems like
we're all climbing up
different sides of a pyramid
trying to get to that top,
to that altered state.
And maybe the psychedelic
is just a shortcut.
Maybe it's just a faster way
to get to that same place.
Some guys who have
gone the other route
said, that once they
did try psychedelics,
it did take them
to a similar state
that they had achieved through
either meditative or breath
work.
So I think we are going
to the same place.
We're just taking
a different route.
So transformation-- the effects
of psychedelics on people
sometimes are so profound
that it's almost like nothing
short of a miracle.
People who have been in
such a dark place for so
long, whether it's with
addiction, depression, anxiety,
you name it, and in one night
or in just a couple of sessions,
their life is changed forever.
Some people say they got more
in one night of a plant medicine
ceremony than they had in
30 years of psychotherapy
or with a psychiatrist.
>> I came to Canada in 2000.
So basically I didn't
speak during the week.
It wasn't easy.
>> So I was growing up
with my mom in Toronto,
and I would have
visitation with my father.
I remember probably taking
my first drink from him
when I was about seven
or eight, around there.
It was oftentimes when
I was with him when
I was in unsafe situations.
If I took a sip of his drink,
or sometimes he would just
give me a little brandy--
that it would put me
at ease and comfort.
My mom worked hard
to support us.
My dad wasn't there
for us financially.
And I was put with a
lot of babysitters.
I was-- sexual abuse
issues and feeling really,
really, really unsafe.
>> I'd always sort of
had a sensitive body,
but I was fully functional.
I had been working a lot.
I worked at Harvard Medical
School, but one day I woke up
and I was just in
incredible pain.
And I would say that the
day before that, in a way,
was the last day of my life.
I couldn't get out of
bed because of pain.
I had gone to a series
of very top doctors.
I was sent to specialist
after specialist.
And they kept
making predictions,
and they kept coming out wrong.
Someone said to
me, you have to be
your own doctor at one point.
And so I started
doing my own research,
and they took a blood test.
And they checked almost
every box on the list,
and I asked the rheumatologist
can we check for scleroderma?
Because luckily, unlike a
lot of these other diseases,
there's a test for it.
And after six months, I
found my own diagnosis,
which is scleroderma, an
autoimmune disease, which
hardens the connective
tissue in your body, which
holds your body together.
So I slowly turned into a mummy.
>> About three years down the
road of hard work and virtually
imbalanced lifestyle-- it's
work, work, work, study, study,
study--
one night it all exploded.
I basically woke up in
the morning about 5:00 AM,
and just feeling so
bizarre and weird,
and it was like everything
was spinning around.
I basically was
losing my breath.
So later on, I realized that
it was a severe panic attack.
I didn't know what
to make of it.
It was basically
so overwhelming.
And then basically that
shifted everything in my life.
I lost sleep completely.
The anxiety attacks were
going one after another--
I mean, like an
avalanche, day after day.
Suffering during the day, not
sleeping during the night,
thinking the craziest thoughts.
The thoughts were
coming by themselves.
Things really started
getting weird.
My blood pressure
dropped like 60 to 80.
My pulse went up over 100.
Always tired and not be able to
relax, or sleep, or anything.
So finally I just
realized, yeah,
I need to go to the doctor.
And it's interesting.
Oddly enough, the doctor looked
at me and said, you're fine.
You're just going--
like many people
are going through stress.
Many immigrants do
go through that,
but everything's fine with you.
You just need to
get it together.
He didn't offer me anything.
He didn't offer
me any counseling.
He didn't offer me
anything at all.
It was like I left
the office virtually
with the same knowledge
that I entered the office.
I just realized that I no
longer can support life.
I can no longer
be in the family.
So I declared to
my wife that I'm
leaving, that we
need to separate,
because it's taking
too much on me.
I totally started losing
it, started getting into all
sorts of conflicts at work.
They let me go.
I worked for the bank for
four years, a very good place.
I went for welfare and
started getting food
from Salvation Army.
And if you know
any notion of what
it is to be out of your
mind, that was what I was.
It was like a mental hospital.
People are there.
They are walking.
Lights are there,
but nobody's home.
>> I found myself by age
11 sneaking into the bar,
and pouring a little bit of
this and a little bit of that.
Then I started with weed,
and that got into cocaine.
I came back to Toronto
and was introduced
to-- was looking
to score cocaine
and was introduced to heroin.
And that was really--
that I would say of
my drug of choice.
Everything else
went by the wayside.
I wasn't interested in
more alcohol and cocaine.
As my addiction progressed,
it was very easy
for me to slip
into prostitution.
I was not high functioning--
definitely not.
That was my primary
relationship--
100%-- was my
relationship with my drug.
I could only facilitate
that by having relationships
that made that possible.
>> School ended.
Everything ended, and
that became my life.
It ended up me getting arrested,
and I got put on methadone.
Being in methadone
clinics for 17, 18 years,
I didn't really see
anybody getting off of it.
It is widely prescribed,
and I didn't see anybody
getting off of it
without going back
on either some kind of either
prescription opiate or street
drug.
They were going to do a year
long thing for me, which
was like four months
or three months
to build me up to a place that
would hold me, and then keep me
there for six months,
and then three months
to take me off of it.
It keeps the drug user in
an active form of addiction,
because you have to
wake up every morning
and take it to feel normal.
That one year turned into
many, many, many years.
With addiction, you have to
be at a point of readiness,
and most people are forced into
going on methadone because they
can't afford their drug anymore,
or they're in legal trouble,
or they're going to
lose their child.
So it's not them making
a conscious decision
that, you know what?
I've reached a point of
willingness, and readiness,
and this is the way that
I can get to clarity.
I've been clean and
sober since August 11,
2005 besides the methadone.
I got off street
drugs and alcohol.
>> From what I understand,
you get maybe 10 years maximum
to live, and it's a
very painful way to go.
I was in tremendous pain,
and I was bedridden.
I traveled by
stretcher by ambulance
for three to four
years, and I was
told that there was no hope.
I think at one point I
was taking 32 pills a day.
I knew I was going to die.
I was very close to death
for a very long time.
And the pain was tremendous.
I didn't sleep for
maybe two years.
Even tucking in a sheet
was too much weight.
So I was sort of like a
cadaver, and they would just
lay the sheet over me.
I contacted a place
in the United States
with nurses who will sit
with you while you euthanize.
They won't help you.
That's not legal, but they'll
be in the room with you
while you do it.
So I was really looking for a
Hail Mary pass at that point.
>> I started to look actively
for help outside the medical
establishment.
So I started-- because
I'm a software developer,
and I do a lot of internet, so
internet is like home for me.
So I started browsing.
I started finding people
with similar stories,
and then I met a lady
who became my friend,
my girlfriend, Natalie.
So she introduced
me to cannabis,
and that was, to
me, the first point
that I actually
learned that there
was hope, because after
I tried it, I fell asleep
after about four or
five years of insomnia.
All I needed from my doctor,
whom I talked to five years
previous to that experience--
the doctor who has been trained
to understand humans, to relieve
them from their suffering--
did not talk to me
about the existence
of healing cannabis,
which is known
to heal stress and insomnia.
And then I had to go
through all the conflict--
to lose my family, to
lose everything, my job--
to meet that lady who is not a
doctor at all, who doesn't even
have a bachelor
education, but she gave me
the gift of cannabis.
And I fell asleep.
>> At that point I
thought that I was clean.
My life changed so much.
I went to my 13th
treatment center.
All this time they're saying
they're bringing doctors
into all these places to
prescribe me my methadone,
and I'm saying,
well, maybe I should
start tapering my methadone.
Lisa, are you kidding?
Just look where
you've come from.
Look what you've done.
Just think of this
as your insulin.
This is just your medication.
This is prescribed, and
this is your medication.
Just be grateful for
where you've come from.
You're a miracle.
So I met my husband
in 12 step rooms.
He's a recovering addict,
alcoholic, as well--
my now husband.
And we became
really good friends.
I met him when I first
got out of treatment.
We were friends for years, and
we ended up getting married.
And once we were married, I
started a pretty heavy duty
taper of methadone,
and it took me
to a place of psychotic breaks.
My brain was saying it's been
too many years, and my brain,
my body, my soul, my spirit
was just in absolute havoc.
>> I started listening to some
podcasts with a man named Dr.
Christopher Ryan, and he was the
first clear intelligent voice
that really articulated using
psychedelics in another way,
in a medicinal way, because
I had only ever viewed it
in a typical way that
our society treats it,
where I wasn't very
interested in that.
So I reached out to
Chris, and Chris said,
I don't know you very well, so
I'm reluctant to suggest this,
but if I were in your position,
I would probably do ayahuasca.
I couldn't get to Peru.
I couldn't even get from
my bed to my commode,
about a foot away from
my bed, without help.
I managed to acquire ayahuasca.
I had spoken with
Dr. Gabor Mat,
who has had patients
with scleroderma before,
and he was able to give me some
advice to help me stay as safe
as possible while I was doing
it, but I just couldn't move.
>> I was reaching out to
all different doctors,
head of psychiatry here, head
of addictions at this hospital.
And they were all telling
me the same thing.
Well, you're on a smaller dose.
Don't taper anymore.
Lisa, please covet
your recovery.
Covet how far you've come.
And I knew that I couldn't.
I couldn't do it.
I couldn't wake up every morning
and have to take something.
And besides that, I was nuts.
I was suicidal.
So my husband was reaching
out to absolutely everybody--
his father is a doctor.
His brother is a doctor.
They were reaching out, and
somebody told them about Gabor
Mat.
In one week, three
people gave us his book,
"The Realm of the Hungry Ghost."
And I'd seen so many doctors.
I've been to so
many specialists,
and Western medicine just kept
giving me the same message--
just stay, just stay.
And he doesn't talk about
psychedelics in his book
at all, but what I heard was a
different compassion from him,
but I still didn't
reach out to him.
My husband sent him an email,
and said, please help my wife.
She's going to die.
She's come so far.
He happened to be in
Toronto a few days later.
I met with him, and he
listened to my whole story
and quite a lot of details, said
very little, and at the end,
he said, I think I
have a way that you
can save your own life.
So a couple of months
later, I went to Mexico,
and I did my first
ayahuasca ceremony.
>> With ayahuasca, I
realized that I finally found
the teacher that
I needed in life.
The ayahuasca
knocked on my heart.
A lot of things of the mind--
the mind just shut down.
The mind, after that
night, was quiet.
It became quiet.
It stopped rambling about
small things, about whatever it
was rumbling before,
about unreasonable things,
endless stories,
endless scenarios.
It eliminated all
panic attacks, so I
have no panic attacks anymore.
I have no anxiety anymore.
I don't even know how
it's possible for me
now to have them.
It's not something that
somebody takes a book,
and reads about
it with this mind,
and makes some kind
of conclusion--
logical conclusion.
It's not about that.
It's a direct
experiential learning.
>> What can I say?
That's where the real
life changing began.
It's not an escape.
Everything I used was
to numb and to escape.
Any plant medicine,
any plant teaching
is going to teach you truth,
and clarity, and connection.
And it's the exact
opposite of what I
was seeking for so many years.
You can come back from the pain
that you've been running from.
You can stop running.
And this has helped me do it.
I have liver disease.
I have Hepatitis C, and I've
never been treated for it.
Ayahuasca brought my counts
right down from very high to
in the normal average range
of a healthy human being.
I also didn't have
my menstruation cycle
for 20 years, and they said
to me, you're perimenopausal.
It's not coming back.
Don't worry about it kind
of a thing-- to working
with a shaman, and he said
to me-- after a ceremony,
he said, Lisa, you have
three spirits in your womb,
and you have to release them.
And I said three spirits?
He said, did you ever
have any abortions?
And I said, yes, I had two.
And he said, no, I
think you had three.
And I'm like, OK, Dave,
I had two, but anyways.
He said, I need you over
these next few ceremonies
to really pray on it,
and every day meditate,
and tell them why you
couldn't parent them, and why
you had to do what you
did, and the place that you
were in when you did it, and
try and let them be at peace,
and go.
He said, I think
after they leave
your period could come back.
And I was just looking at him.
I had just started
ayahuasca and started
working with the shaman,
and I was like, OK.
Then I'm just hearing my
addiction specialist's voice.
Lisa, just trust, just trust,
just trust, just trust.
And I'm like OK.
So I worked on this
over a two week period.
I did about 10 ceremonies.
I'd done nine ceremonies.
I was leaving the next morning
from Mexico on a 7:30 AM water
taxi.
And he came to me, and he said,
Lisa, we worked really hard.
He said we need to do one
more ceremony tonight.
I'm going to have a
private ceremony for you.
There's still one release
that has to happen.
I was like, I can't do it.
I got to go back to
my life tomorrow,
and there's absolutely no way.
Well, I ended up trusting
and doing this last ceremony.
And after the ceremony, he
said, OK, our work is done.
And I was flying
home on the plane,
and after 20 years of no
cycle, I went to the washroom,
and I had my period.
And I've had it ever since.
So I came home, and I
told my mom this story.
And I told her
the story exactly.
And I said, but I only
had two abortions.
She said, no, Lisa, you don't
remember at the very end.
You had three.
Talk about trust.
>> I tried it for the first
time at the end of 2013,
and the first time I drank
I could stand up and walk,
and the pain was gone.
It was just gone.
I threw up a lot.
It was very painful.
It was very violent, but it was
very difficult to do it alone.
After two years, I was well
enough to travel and finally
get to a real shaman.
And I've been working
with him since December,
so about six months.
>> I was so used
to being numbed.
I had no relationship
with my body.
with my spirit.
I was just vacant, and
ayahuasca showed me
who I am, who I was meant
to be, reconnected me with
my self, my soul, my life force.
That flame that was always
flickering inside me--
as much as I tried
to snub it out--
and I tried hard--
it brought it to a
full burning torch.
And the beauty of
ayahuasca is, after I've
had a painful,
painful time, it shows
me the most incredible
light that I didn't even
know existed, and
light, and connection.
So I would say that's what
it is-- it's connection.
It's connection with my physical
body, my emotional body.
Without question, knowing
that I'm connected
to something bigger, greater.
Without any doubt.
I have no doubt now.
So maybe it was a
rebirthing, because I know
I'm part of something bigger.
>> Well, any type of healing,
including ayahuasca, where--
true healing.
I'm not talking taking
the symptoms away
by medication or surgery.
True healing-- it,
number one, takes time.
And it's a transformation.
So ayahuasca will go into
the root of the illness,
and it's always tied in
with some type of trauma
that we hold.
It's not actually
complicated healing.
It's about getting in touch
with what's present in your body
now, what you hold from
decades prior, or years prior.
And it's just a matter
of letting that go,
but we hold it.
We hold it, and we resist it.
>> My colleagues-- my medical
colleagues would say, well,
that's an anecdotal
piece of evidence.
It doesn't mean anything.
Yes, it's anecdotal.
There's no long term
controlled studies of ayahuasca
in the treatment of scleroderma.
Well, how could that possibly be
when it's an illegal substance?
But there are other stories
like this, plenty of them,
and I happen to believe in
the power of human experience.
And I know.
I've seen it.
I've seen it with
other conditions.
I've treated people with severe
inflammatory bowel disease
who can get off their
medications after the ayahuasca
experience.
I know people with
rheumatoid arthritis
whose doctors had given up on
them, who are off medications.
Yes, these are anecdotes,
but at least it
means that we should be taking
them seriously and studying it.
In my opinion-- and I would also
say according to the very well
established research evidence,
all chronic illnesses,
with the exception of a very few
genetically determined ones--
all chronic illnesses, whether
it's mental illness like ADHD,
which I have been diagnosed
with, or addiction,
or depression, or psychosis,
or the physical illnesses
like the autoimmune
conditions, cancer, and so on--
they're all relatable to
early childhood emotion
or loss and their consequences.
And there's more and
more evidence about that,
and not only early childhood,
but even what happens in utero.
So it also means that,
if you can understand
the connections-- and there's
a tremendous literature now
showing not the connection,
but the unity of mind and body.
A recent study out in Virginia
just last week about--
turns out that the brain
is totally connected
to the immune system.
The emotions are connected
Now, that's not new,
but it was big news,
because people
didn't know about it.
But again, more proof--
thousands of research articles.
So given that the emotional
system, and the immune system,
and the nervous system,
and the hormonal apparatus
form one unit, it would
be stupid to suppose
that emotional experiences have
no impact on our physiology.
>> So I also noticed through
some of the studies I was
looking at that, at the
root of all disease,
there's something
called inflammation.
Some studies were showing
that there's inflammation
and depression are linked.
Some studies are also
showing that emotional trauma
and inflammation are linked.
And there's also
a bunch of studies
that show that psychedelics have
anti-inflammatory properties.
There seems to be a
link, but what is it?
Does inflammation cause things
like anxiety, depression,
and maybe physical ailments?
Or is it a symptom of them?
Could there be an
emotional link?
For example, could emotional
trauma cause inflammation.
Then it slowly manifests
into emotional, mental,
and physical sickness,
like anxiety, depression,
or even disease?
Could it be possible, then, that
psychedelics could potentially
heal these emotional wounds
and potentially also reduce
and reverse inflammation?
I feel a lot more research
needs to be done in this area.
The influence of psychedelics
on modern society
is profound, but goes
relatively unseen.
It is said that Silicon Valley
was sort of inspired or founded
with a psychedelic influence
behind it in the '60s, '50s.
Guys like Steve Jobs
said that taking LSD
was a profound experience, one
of the most important things
in my life.
LSD shows you that there's
another side to the coin.
You can't remember when it
wears off, but you know it.
It reinforced my
sense of what was
important-- creating great
things instead of making money,
putting things back into
the stream of history
and of human consciousness
as much as I could.
Other discoveries, like DNA and
the polymerase chain reaction,
were attributed to
experiences with LSD.
And even bands, like Jimi
Hendrix or the Beatles,
totally revolutionized their
sound through their experiences
with psychedelics.
>> Hallucinogens seem to play
the role of breaking down
our perception with reality.
That relationship is something
that we don't even see,
because it's a part of
the way that we operate.
And a lot of the
times, our reactions
aren't as obvious to us.
We feel that they're
brought on because
of the specific
circumstances when
really those specific
circumstances in our lives--
they just allow for the
right conditions for us
to express ourselves exactly
the way that we are feeling
in that moment,
or something that
might be building up over time.
So taking something
like mushrooms,
or San Pedro,
ayahuasca, you name
it, anything that
DMT breaks down
the typical way we see things
and opens up new patterns,
new ways of seeing.
You listen to music on LSD.
You're going to notice different
things in songs that you've
heard hundreds of times.
Films-- you'll pick up
on different things.
People's facial
quirks that you never
notice they make all the time--
you'll start noticing.
How weird your cat
might be-- is it
just because I'm on mushrooms?
These types of things
start to occur to you,
so you start questioning a lot
of the most deeply held beliefs
and concepts that we hold
about reality in general.
Now, the caveat to all this
is doing it responsibly,
doing it medicinally,
possibly shamanically
has to do with something
that serves the greater good.
And you'd find a hard time
serving the greater good if you
don't even understand the
patterns that are deeply rooted
in you that do not serve
you and possibly harm
you, the chronic addictions,
anything that we do habitually,
rather than intentionally.
>> Science has not explained
what consciousness is.
It can describe
certain aspects of it,
but explain it it cannot do.
So maybe the brain is more like
a receiver or a transceiver
of consciousness.
Right now, we don't know.
And it's an area that
needs deep investigation,
and you know what?
We've got the tools to do.
We got the psychedelics.
There is no more efficient
way to put somebody
into a deeply altered
state of consciousness
and to explore what that
really means than something
like dimethyltryptamine, DMT.
It's a very powerful force.
And right now, our society
is refusing to investigate.
It's refusing to
use psychedelics
as a modality for investigating
the mystery of consciousness,
and that's a great mistake.
And that comes out of the
idiotic and monstrous war
on drugs.
Gradually science is
looking into new research
with psychedelics, looking at
their therapeutic potential,
but the next big step is to
use psychedelics to investigate
the mystery of
consciousness itself.
>> The larger picture--
I think the role
that psychedelics
will play in neuroscience,
and understanding
how our brain works, and
psychotherapy, understanding
more healing technologies,
and in developing
a global spirituality,
and helping people
be more appreciative
of other people who
are different, and more
aware of our commonality--
that all of that
will be developing.
And so I'm very
hopeful for the future
and think that the incorporation
and the mainstreaming
of psychedelics into society
will play a major role
in healing, spirituality,
recreation, creativity,
and cultural and human survival.
>> If psychedelics do
become accepted for use
in our society, I think
that's where you're going to--
eventually I think there
should be centers where people
can go to have
these experiences,
and they won't look
like hospitals.
They'll look like spas.
You go for a weekend
to take psychedelics
with mom and the kids, and
you have a wonderful weekend.
And you come out, and you're a
more evolved and wiser person.
>> In an ideal world, we would
drop this Western arrogance
that we know better.
We would realize
that, as much as we've
achieved with Western
technology and science,
we've also lost a lot.
And what we've lost are deep
wisdoms developed and lived
by aboriginal peoples.
I mean, we'll drop
the idea that there's
only one way of
looking at things,
and we would allow ourselves
to explore other modalities
to be justifiably
proud of what we know,
and to be humble about
what we don't know.
>> I think that we live
in a culture of PTSD.
And we're always trying
to soothe our symptoms.
I just sort of see that
we've just got it all wrong.
I was in a white hospital room
with sanitized airplane cabin
air for a very long time.
And really you
need nature, and I
think that there's an arrogance
in the West of thinking
that we humans can do nature
better than nature can.
>> So the story I'd been told
ended up being far different
from the reality I'd experienced
in these last couple of years
once I started exploring
psychedelics and this whole
other world.
And it made me think.
Were we supposed to
have these experiences,
have this relationship
with plant medicines
and psychedelics?
And if we were, what happened?
How did we get disconnected?
Was it intentional?
Were we severed from this
relationship on purpose,
or did it just happen?
And are we then
experiencing a deficiency?
And I think that the state of
the world and a lot of people
on a personal level feel all
this chaos and disconnection.
And it only makes sense that
something like psychedelics
can help to heal both the
individual and the world--
is take it in the right context.
And people have the opportunity
to take it in a place
where there is no fear of being
caught for legality reasons.
And there are centers
opening up now where
people can have these
experiences, so there
is a promising sort of light
at the end of the tunnel.
And I feel that the
world will be a better
place if more people can
have these experiences.
I don't find it a
coincidence that ayahuasca
has come out of the jungle
and spread across the world.
And iboga out of Africa is now
spreading across the world.
The disconnected
world we live in
is starving for reconnection.
Not only have they been used
safely for thousands of years,
they really don't fit the
illegal status requirements
most of them fall under.
They have shown immense
potential for spiritual growth
and have support from the
spiritual community, as well.
They also create an
experience that has
transformed the lives of many.
Is it time to reconsider
the role of plant medicines
as psychedelics in our society?
Is it time to at least allow
people to have the freedom
to choose for themselves
the right to explore
their own consciousness?
Is it time for truth?
>> It is not too much to
say that, in your hands,
lies the possibility of averting
other tragedies like it.
We must work untiringly
so that our children are
obliged to learn the
truth, because it is only
through knowledge that we
can safely protect them.
Failing this, the
next tragedy may
be that of your daughter, or
your son, or yours, or yours,
or yours.
>> Thank you guys so much
for watching "Psyched Out."
I really think that, with more
awareness around the subject
of psychedelics, it'll become
more mainstream, and a lot more
money and research will
get to go into it so
that we could really find out
the full potential that it has.
Whether it's for
health, whether it's
for physical health,
mental health, creativity,
the sky is the
limits in my opinion.
So thanks for watching, guys.
Please share with your friends.
Help spread the word so we can
raise awareness about planet
medicines and psychedelics.
Peace.